feat: publish to Sonatype OSSRH (#102)
substrait-io/substrait-java: ci/release/README.md

# CI CD

## Introduction

- `Semantic release` help us to automates the whole package release workflow including:
  - Determining the next version number,
  - Generating the release notes,
  - Publishing the package.
- New features and fixes are `immediately` available to users on Staging repository.
- Use formalized `commit message convention` to document changes in the codebase.

## Credentials

### Github Token

> ![github_token](img/github_token.png)

Author: The proposal is to also create a release to upload Isthmus binaries libs (i.e [example](https://github.com/daviddalisusanibararce/tmp-sustrait-java/releases/tag/v2.0.0)). It is under review and if it won't be needed we need to limit scope. Comments at https://github.com/substrait-io/substrait-java/pull/102#issuecomment-1311184786

> Then, this environment variable is ready to use `${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}`.

Author: Let me test that

> Then, this environment variable is ready to use `${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}`.

Author: Thank you @westonpace, it is as you mention, not needed to create that (just delete that part from the documentation).

> ### Public/Private Key

Author: One of the [requirements](https://central.sonatype.org/publish/requirements/) for publishing artifacts to the Central Repository OSSRH, is that they have been signed with PGP

> ### Public/Private Key

Reviewer: Yes, sorry.  I was asking if we should also put the public key on the site somewhere.  For example, for Apache Arrow, I can find the public keys for developers here: https://dist.apache.org/repos/dist/dev/arrow/KEYS

> ### Public/Private Key

Author: Just added the documentation about downloading the public key and doing validations about the release.

```shell
$ gpg --full-gen-key
$ gpg --list-keys
$ gpg --keyserver keyserver.ubuntu.com --send-keys 193EAE47
$ gpg --export-secret-keys 193EAE47 | base64
```

Configure values for:
```properties
SIGNING_KEY_ID = 193EAE47
SIGNING_PASSWORD = password
SIGNING_KEY = gpg --export-secret-keys 193EAE47 | base64
```

### Actions Secrets

Create these actions secrets used by release process:

> ![actions_secrets](img/actions_secrets.png "title")

Author: There are no reason that these values needs to be protected.

## Repository Manager

The artifacts are deployed to Sonatype OSSRH (Sonatype Open Source Software Repository Manager).

These are the repositories availables:
- Snapshots: https://s01.oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/snapshots
- Staging: https://s01.oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/staging
- Releases: https://s01.oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/releases

![repositories](img/repositories.png)

## Release Process

- Every push to pre-release branches `beta` deploy an artifact to `snapshots repository` and it's ready to be used.

> - Every push to release branches `main`, `maintenance` deploy an artifact to `staging repository` and it's ready to be used.

Author: My proposal is to only handle main ------ commit/push to deploy to ------> staging

But, there will be some scenarios for some features that you would like to create the jar library and be able to test/use without merge your changes on main branch, beta will help us on that to deploy snapshot version from beta branch.

All of these are only capabilities, if we are going to use that, then will be needed to create `beta` branch as needed.

- If there are no restrictions/problems/impediments next step is release the artifact to `maven central`.

> - There is needed a `manual release` to send the libraries to `maven central`.

Reviewer: What is this manual process?  Do I need to run a script?

Author: Currently there is a UI when we could promote an library from `staging` to `release` to maven central

<img width="1013" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4554485/202500048-332b280d-9b58-41dd-bfa2-018d6d2fb768.png">

Another way is to create a Job to deploy version from `staging` to `release` automatically every 5 days for example. Discussion at https://github.com/substrait-io/substrait-java/pull/102#issuecomment-1311059317

> - Every push to pre-release branches `beta` deploy an artifact to `snapshots repository` and it's ready to be used.
> - Every push to release branches `main`, `maintenance` deploy an artifact to `staging repository` and it's ready to be used.
> - If there are no restrictions/problems/impediments next step is release the artifact to `maven central`.
> - There is needed a `manual release` to send the libraries to `maven central`.
> - In case of issues/problems/errors there is a `Drop` options available to delete the release version.
> - Once a component has been released and published to the Central Repository, it cannot be altered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Every push to pre-release branches `beta` deploys an artifact to the `snapshots repository` and it's ready to be used.
- Every push to release branches `main`, `maintenance` deploys an artifact to the `staging repository` and it's ready to be used.
- If there are no restrictions/problems/impediments then the next step is to release the artifact to `maven central`.
- There is a `manual release` process to send the libraries to `maven central`.
- In case of issues/problems/errors there is also a `drop` option available to delete the release version.
- Once a component has been released and published to the Central Repository, it cannot be altered.
```

![release](img/release_process.png)

> ## Artifacts
> 
> - Github Artifacts:
>   - https://github.com/substrait/sustrait-java/releases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Artifacts

Once published, the artifacts can be downloaded from the following locations:

- Github Artifacts:
  - https://github.com/substrait/sustrait-java/releases
```

- Sonatype OSSRH Artifacts:
  - https://s01.oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/{snapshots,staging,releases}/substrait/substrait-java/core/1.0.0/

## Branches Configuration

> - In case of new features or breaking changes create a branch with any format name.
>   Example:
>   ```shell
>   # Current version on production: 2.5.7
>   $ git checkout -b new_feature_1234 main
>   ```
>   After your PR is merged to main branch, you could see the new libraries available at Sonatype staging environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Regular development of new features and functionality is done by creating PRs into the `main` branch

  After your PR is merged to main branch, you could see the new libraries available in the Sonatype staging environment.
```

- In case of maintenances please create a branch name with this pattern `+([0-9])?(.{+([0-9]),x}).x`.
  Example:
  ```shell
  # Current version on production: 2.5.7, version planned to use for maintenance: 2.1.7

>   $ git checkout -b 2.1.x v2.1.7 # for fix

Reviewer: I'm not sure we want to commit to doing maintenance releases at this point but it's ok I think to plan for it and describe the process.

Author: Ok

> - In case of maintenances please create a branch name with this pattern `+([0-9])?(.{+([0-9]),x}).x`.
>   Example:
>   ```shell
>   # Current version on production: 2.5.7, version planned to use for maintenance: 2.1.7
>   $ git checkout -b 2.1.x v2.1.7 # for fix
>   $ git checkout -b 2.x v2.1.7 # for maintenance
>   ```
>   After your PR is merged to main branch, you could see the new libraries available at Sonatype staging environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To create a maintenance release please create a branch name with this pattern `+([0-9])?(.{+([0-9]),x}).x`.
  Example:
  ```shell
  # Current version on production: 2.5.7, version planned to use for maintenance: 2.1.7
  $ git checkout -b 2.1.x v2.1.7 # for fix
  $ git checkout -b 2.x v2.1.7 # for maintenance
  ```
  After your PR is merged to main branch, you could see the new libraries available at Sonatype staging environment.
```

>   After your PR is merged to main branch, you could see the new libraries available at Sonatype staging environment.

Reviewer: > After your PR is merged to main branch

Is this accurate?  I don't think a maintenance release gets merged into main.

Author: Consider:
- Main branch are at: v3.7.5
- Maintenance start from: v3.7.x
- New changes are coming

Then:
- Some team send a PR to main branch and move to: v4.0.0 version available to use
- Then maintenance fix changes are ready and generate: v3.7.6 version available to use
- Then, it is time to port the changes from maintenance to main branch an generate: v.4.0.1 version available to use

At the end is up to the user to choose v3.7.6 for last fixes or is the user are ready to move to next version the could also have the fix at v4.0.1 version, for this reason is that maintenance branch create release version also.

> - In case you need to experiment with breaking change functionalities for new feature, take a look at pre-release branch.
>   Example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In case you need to experiment with breaking changes for a new feature, you can use a pre-release branch.
  Example:
```

  ```shell
  # Current version on production: 2.5.7, version planned to use for maintenance: 2.1.7
  $ git checkout -b new_feature_lots_changes beta
  ```

>   After your PR is merged to main branch, you could see the new libraries available at Sonatype snapshots environment.

Reviewer: If I'm experimenting with a breaking change wouldn't the whole point be to create a "beta release" that is available **before** the PR is merged to the main branch?

Author: Yes, let me update that. It will be: 
`After your PR is merged to beta branch, you could see the new libraries available at Sonatype snapshots environment.`

Branches configuration:

```json
  "branches": [
    // maintenances (also generate release)
    { "name": "+([0-9])?(.{+([0-9]),x}).x" },
    // release
    { "name": "main" },
    { "name": "next" },
    { "name": "next-major" },
    // pre-release
    { "name": "beta", "prerelease": true },
    { "name": "alpha", "prerelease": true }
  ],
```

## Q&A

> #### 1. What will be happened if I merge something on `main` branch and finalize with errors?

Reviewer: What does "and finalize with errors?" mean?

Author: Let me update that. 

It will be:

`What will be happened if I merge something on main branch and for some reason the process finished with errors or the job is completed with failures messages?`

> CICD has a token configure with granted access to create issues as needed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CI process will automatically create a Github issue to track the failure.
```

```shell
[10:30:55 PM] [semantic-release] [@semantic-release/github] › ℹ  Created issue #3: https://github.com/substrait/sustrait-java/issues/3.
```

![release_failing](img/automate_release_is_failing.png)

> #### 2. Could be possible to implement a process to deliver a library with custom version (i.e.: 3.2.9.RC1, 5.0.0.M1)?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 2. Is it possible to release a library with a custom version (i.e.: 3.2.9.RC1, 5.0.0.M1)?
```

We are using Sonatype OSSRH and there are repositories for `snapshots` / `staging` / `release`:
- If your library finalize with `1.4.3-XXXXX-SNAPSHOT` -> it is going to be deployed to Snapshots repository

> - If your library finalize with `1.4.3-XXXXX-SNAPSHOT.YYYY` -> it is going to be deployed to Staging/Releases repository

Reviewer: What does it mean for a library to finalize?  Does this mean the destination repository is based on the name of the artifacts?  Or is the the value of the version field?

Author: Let me update that. The destination repository is based on the name of the artifacts. It will be:

We are using Sonatype OSSRH, the destination repository (`snapshots` / `staging` / `release`) is based on the name of the artifacts:
- For library name artifacts as `1.4.3-XXXXX-SNAPSHOT` -> it is going to be deployed to Snapshots repository
- For library name artifacts as `1.4.3-XXXXX-SNAPSHOT.YYYY` -> it is going to be deployed to Staging/Releases repository
- For library name artifacts as `1.4.3-XXXXX` -> it is going to be deployed to Staging/Releases repository
- For library name artifacts as `1.4.3` -> it is going to be deployed to Staging/Releases repository

- If your library finalize with `1.4.3-XXXXX` -> it is going to be deployed to Staging/Releases repository
- If your library finalize with `1.4.3` -> it is going to be deployed to Staging/Releases repository

#### 2. How many days do I have to approve the artifacts on the Staging repository?

> Please review [OSSRH-24751](https://issues.sonatype.org/browse/OSSRH-24751)

Reviewer: What happens if a release is not approved in the time limit?

Author: There is not an option to recover that version. A initial proposal is to run a Job that after 5 days on staging environment automatically deploy that to release maven central, more detal at https://github.com/substrait-io/substrait-java/pull/102#issuecomment-1311059317

Author: Consider: [OSSRH-86341](https://issues.sonatype.org/browse/OSSRH-86341)

- Open staging repositories are dropped after 3 days of inactivity.
- Closed staging repositories are dropped after 21 days of inactivity.
- Released staging repositories are dropped within an hour or two of release.
